Document network analysis algorithms (#3203)
qgis/QGIS-Documentation: source/docs/user_manual/processing_algs/qgis/networkanalysis.rst

.. only:: html

   |updatedisclaimer|

Network analysis
================

.. only:: html

   .. contents::
      :local:
      :depth: 1

.. _qgisserviceareafromlayer:

Service area (from layer)
-------------------------
Returns all the substrings of streets on a network that can be reached within a distance or

> a time starting from any point of a layer. This allows to evaluate accessibilty within

Reviewer: There are two service area algorithms, one that takes a point, and one that takes a layer of points.  I have missed that this is the description of only the layer one.

a network, eg what are the places I can navigate to on a road network without spending
cost greater than a given value (the cost can be a distance or a time).

Parameters
..........

``Vector layer representing the network`` [vector: line]
  Line vector layer representing the network to be covered.

``Vector layer with start points`` [vector: point]

>   Point vector layer whose features are used as start points to generate the service area.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Point vector layer whose features are used as start points to generate the service areas.
```

``Path type to calculate`` [enumeration]

>   <put parameter description here>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The type of path to calculate (shortest or fastest).
```

  
  Options are:
  
  * 0 --- Shortest
  * 1 --- Fastest
  
  Default: *0*

``Travel cost`` [number]
  The value is estimated as a distance (in the project map units) when looking for the *Shortest*
  path and as time (in hours) for the *Fastest* path.

  Default: *0.0*

``Advanced parameters``
  ``Direction field`` [tablefield: string]
    Optional
    

>     <put parameter description here>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The field used to specify direction.  The values used in this field are specified with the three parameters
    ``Value for forward direction``, ``Value for backward direction`` and ``Value for both directions``.
```

    Forward and reverse directions correspond to a one-way road, both directions indicate a two-way road.

>     If some features don’t have any value set, the default direction setting is applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If some features don’t have any value set, the default direction setting (provided with the `Default direction``
    parameter) is applied.
```

Reviewer: Thanks!

  ``Value for forward direction`` [string]
    Optional

>     Value set in the direction field to identify roads in forward direction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Value set in the direction field to identify edges with a forward direction.
```

  ``Value for backward direction`` [string]
    Optional

>     Value set in the direction field to identify roads in backward direction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Value set in the direction field to identify edges with a backward direction.
```

  ``Value for both directions`` [string]
    Optional

>     Value set in the direction field to identify roads in both directions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Value set in the direction field to identify bidirectional edges.
```

  ``Default direction`` [enumeration]
    If a feature has no value set in the direction field or if no direction field is set,

>     then following property is applied to all the features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    then this direction value is used.
```

    Available options are:

    * 0 --- Forward direction
    * 1 --- Backward direction

>     * 2 --- Both directions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * 2 --- Bidirectional
```

    Default: *2*

  ``Speed field`` [tablefield: string]
    Optional

>     Field setting the speed value for each line on the network when looking for the fastest path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Field providing the speed value for the edges of the network when looking for the fastest path.
```

>     If not available, a default speed value is used.

Reviewer 2: "a default speed" -> "the default speed"

>     If not available, a default speed value is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If not available, the default speed is used.
```

Author: Maybe, to mimic the direction field description (L55), something like:
``If some features don’t have any value set, the default speed setting (provided with the ``Default speed`` parameter) is applied.``? applied vs used?

Reviewer: I have tried to improve it, but with some other words.

  ``Default speed`` [number]

>     Value to use to calculate the travel time if no speed field is provided for a line feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Value to use to calculate the travel time if no speed field is provided for an edge.
```

    Default: *5.0*

  ``Topology tolerance`` [number]
    Two lines with nodes closer than the specified tolerance are considered connected.

    Default: *0.0*

  ``Include upper/lower bound points`` [boolean]

>     <put parameter description here>

Reviewer 2: This is a slightly odd setting - but was put in to maintain compatibility with older algorithm behaviour. What it does is creates a point layer output with two points for each line segment at the boundaries of the service area. One point is the start of that line segment, the other is the end. I'm not sure what the use case was for this behavior so can't help to explain further unfortunately.

>     <put parameter description here>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Creates a point layer output with two points for each line segment at the boundaries of the
    service area.
    One point is the start of that line segment, the other is the end
```

Author: missing full stop

Reviewer: Thanks!

    Default: *False*

Outputs
.......

``Service area (lines)`` [vector: line]

>   Line layer representing the area accessible on the network from the input points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Line layer representing the parts of the network that can be serviced by the input points.
```

``Service area (boundary nodes)`` [vector: point]
  Point layer representing the furthest points on the network from the start points,

>   at the given cost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for the given cost.
```

 

.. _qgisserviceareafrompoint:

Service area (from point)
-------------------------

> Starting from a point, returns all the substrings of lines on a network that can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from a point, returns all the lines or parts of lines of a network that can be
```

> reached within a distance or a time. This allows to evaluate accessibilty within

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reached within a given distance or time. This allows the evaluation of accessibility within
```

a network, eg what are the places I can navigate to on a road network without spending

> a cost greater than a given value (the cost can be a distance or a time).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a cost greater than a given value (the cost can be distance or time).
```

Parameters
..........

``Start point (x, y)`` [coordinates]
  Coordinate of the point to calculate the service area around.

Outputs
.......

``Service area (lines)`` [vector: line]

>   Line layer representing the area accessible on the network from the start point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Line layer representing the part of the network that can be serviced by the start point.
```

``Service area (boundary nodes)`` [vector: point]
  Point layer representing the furthest points on the network from the start point,

>   at the given cost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for the given cost.
```

.. _qgisshortestpathlayertopoint:

Shortest path (layer to point)
------------------------------
Computes optimal (shortest or fastest) route from multiple start points defined

> by vector layer and given end point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by a vector layer and a given end point.
```

Parameters
..........

``Vector layer representing the network`` [vector: line]
  <put parameter description here>

``Path type to calculate`` [enumeration]
  <put parameter description here>

``Vector layer with start points`` [vector: point]
  <put parameter description here>

``End point (x, y)`` [coordinates]
  <put parameter description here>

Outputs
.......

``Shortest path`` [vector: line]
  Line layer of the shortest or fastest path from each of the start points to the end point.

.. _qgisshortestpathpointtolayer:

Shortest path (point to layer)
------------------------------

> Computes optimal (shortest or fastest) route between given start point and multiple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Computes optimal (shortest or fastest) route between a given start point and multiple
```

> end points defined by point vector layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
end points defined by a point vector layer.
```

Parameters
..........

``Start point (x, y)`` [coordinates]
  <put parameter description here>

``Vector layer with end points`` [vector: point]
  <put parameter description here>

Outputs
.......

``Shortest path`` [vector: line]
  Line layer of the shortest or fastest path from the start point to each of the end points.

.. _qgisshortestpathpointtopoint:

Shortest path (point to point)
------------------------------

> Computes optimal (shortest or fastest) route between given start and end points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Computes the optimal (shortest or fastest) route between a given start and given end point.
```

  ``Speed field`` [tablefield: string]
    Optional

>     Field providing the speed value (in ``km/h``) for the edges of the network when

Reviewer: Are you certain that it has to be km/h - could it not also be miles/h?
I won't repeat this for the rest of the km/h occurrences...

Author: I think any unit is possible as long as all features have a value. Otherwise, it would not make sense given that the replacement value (aka "default speed") is in km/h. If the "speed field" is in another unit, then a conversion of the default value is required.
Maybe should I have added `(by default in km/h)` but thinking more, I wonder why there's a unit for the "default speed". There's nothing obvious in the GUI about the used unit. And given all the possible units combination, I'm not sure the speed unit should be hidden/hardcoded... maybe a unit combobox?
To give you an answer, I'm certain of nothing, anymore! Maybe someone that reads the code...

Reviewer 2: yes - looks to be km/h from my understanding of the code.

Author: OK. Thanks to both of you. Let's go with km/h then.
@havatv OK to merge?

Reviewer: Please, go ahead :-)

Parameters
..........

``Vector layer representing the network`` [vector: line]

>   Line vector layer representing the network to be covered.

Reviewer: covered -> analysed?
